This Companion Guide, in the FHIR Reconciliation Model, attempts to balance the need for separating the 3 domains required in Whole Person Care while leveraging the SDOH Clinical Care IG and being backward compatible with FHIR.

Separating concerns, as a general principle, makes software more module and as a result more manageable, maintainable, and understandable by reducing complexity. The alternative is overloading the meaning and use of concepts. The approach of overloading can simplify interfaces used by developers and the reuse of code. However, it does lead to ambiguity of concepts and code complexity.

As the Whole Person Care View is an aggregated view across these different domains, developing such solutions introduces its own complexity. It will require aggregated views across different domains. The goal is the FHIR Reconciliation Model will enable the HL7 community to take a leadership position understanding that social services are different and need for it to be a first-class citizen in systems. Delivering efficient and cost-effective social services for producing healthy outcomes for individuals, families, households, tribes, and larger populations while continuing to build FHIR systems that understand the causal relationships between domains is critical.

Although beyond the scope of this informative guide, there have been patterns implemented by existing FHIR systems that can provide guidance for an infrastructure for delivering the aggregated Whole Person Care View. An example is in distributed environments where multiple patient records exist for the same individual and are consolidated to provide an aggregated, logical view of the patient across all these systems. Examples of these solutions requiring such capabilities are HIEs, QHINs, CIEs, CCHs, and complex hospital systems with localized systems.
